Saturday afternoon
Jan 5th (1900)

My Dear Edward,

Your letter of Jan 2nd at hand this noon. I am sorry you are having such a hard time keeping warm. Also that you had to load Mrs. White my stove again. She asked me for it before I left and I told her I expected to have it put in Vera's room as soon as Mr. Zimmerman fixed the place for it. I always wish you had sent home the old cook stove and put that in the kitchen. She uses hot water heat irons on and cook on.

I thought I wrote you in regard to El Paso but suppose not. THe place is as busy as we could wish. Every thing taken hold of flourishes. I would not want a grocery here. Altho (sic) all that are here do rushing business, and there are a great many. I have only seen one place where they have meat in (page 2) with grocery and that place is only rented to a butcher than is one side is entirely separate owned by another party. The grocery stocks are simply immense all fine goods and so many of each kind. 

The people here are all composed of well bred "mind your own business" kind, but sympathetic and social. The kind one likes to meet. The Mexicans cut very little figure here, altho (sic) the mayor is half Mexican and half Irish, those that have any say are Americanized and educated. They Mexicans came and look over our back twice every day to see if we want our yard cleaned or wood cut. Mrs. Roberts who we  sew w/ has a watch dog, it drives them away in quick order.

Frank has had dealings with the lower class at the ice house. He says he has found them all right if not picked upon. The two that were hung yesterday the paper writes up were what they call down here "bad men" accent on men. The account was overdrawn, paper being sensational. 

I can see where the money put in those old lots could have brought us (page 3) in here an income, and in a year or so doubled our money, just think of the present time when the boom here is hardly on, of buying lovely lots 25x125 for one hundred and fifty dollars each, this for cash right under the shadow of the mountain where all the neighbors are Americans and the air always pure: an adobe house can be built for one hundred dollars a room, and each room not furnished can be rented for 5.00 per room, that is a four room house 20.00. 

I took dinner Sunday (and such a swell dinner) at lawyer Wallace's, he built a place last year that cost him fifteen hundred dollars, brick. 3 rooms. He sold it for 2500, took the money and built across the street an another lot he owned the easiest 5 room brick. 3 fine places in it and gas, hot & cold water, big windows for 1700, but it could not be built for less now than 2000. I would be satisfied with an adobe. The is one next door here. They plaster them out and in and paint them mostly white they are considered healthier than any house. 

I am going to try and trade my lot for one (page 4) one of the lots here so near the mountains, don't suppose I can but will try. Where we live is very high. The hill is so gradual though that one does not mind it unless they are as Frank is. At present he had a house belonging to a young man who has go to Capitan up in New Mexico. They say there is the biggest kind of chance there to make money in boarders. The Chinese eating house where all the railroad men and coal miners board, being dirty and unbearable, coffee in tin cups, pie pans for plates, butter in an old tin pail, board (day) five dollars a week. 

It is too cold there for Frank at present or I would get the company who has the miners to put me up a shack and tackle it with the aid of a colored woman, or if you were here we could make money. It is one hundred miles from here, a new place, within 10 miles of than big health resort for care sympathies founded by joint railroads in the west.

I can get my token extended, Dr. Webb gave me a note or certificate to the effect that I am detained here by sickness. When I took it to the agent here who smokes when he talks to ladies, he said (page 5) he did not need it as he had advise to extend my ticket. Frank doesn't enjoy my visit as he would for the thought that I must return. He is sad for us both. He realizes his condition and knows what my going means. He often speaks of the old times and thinks you have been very kind to him many times.

In regards to my expenses here I am only to pay half an considering there are two of us and Frank took the place for us I might be satisfied. As near as I can figure and that clearly it will cost Vera and I 30.00 a month. and that by doing my own and Vera's wash. Frank pays 50 cents a week for his. I put 7 pieces in last week for Vera and I and they were one dollar. Our grocery & C comes due the 15th of this month, so send me some by that time. I have not counted on anything extra. Vera has been sick and I have had to pay doctors also for medicine. She is recovering but you can imagine my anxiety until I knew she would be alright. 

I'm going to keep the ten dollars Belle sent to Mr. Spies until I get yours.

Frank ha improved since I cam and keeps up his old jolly ways. Vera has not been very nice here. She does not want (page 6) to play her mandolin at all. Blanche is anxious to start a hairdressing and manicure parlor here. She has applied for half rates, and I thinks if she get them, Pa ought to send her enough to come out and I will feel better when she is here and Frank does all he possibly can but needs every cent to live on for living is so high. I don't see how he stood in here alone. He says it was to save funeral expenses. 

Try and have carries careful with that old smoky old stove and cook you what you need and take good care of yourself. Tell Belle I expected to write here but Vera needs me to play with also then on account of her sickness. Frank and I have not been over to Mex. to get her present, so rubber for it later. 

Yours with love,

Ida

Frank borrowed a nice two burner gasoline stone me me.

Vera will write first of week hugs her dollar and think she has a good papa.